---
title: ' Getting Started with Ham Radio'
date: 2017-11-12
categories:
    - projects
tags:
    - 'ham radio'
---
# Getting Started with Ham Radio

One of the goals on my bucket list has been getting my Ham radio license.  I 
don't remember, really, when it first landed on my list.  I was a teen and it 
most likely was the result of some movie I saw or book I read that extolled the 
use and excitement of reaching out to the world through radio. The desire wasn't 
helped, I'm sure, by having an uncle that got into it after he retired.
<!-- more -->


Times have changed, of course, and where once amateur radio was the only  means 
for 
contacting the world beyond my community, the internet has made huge inroads in 
that domain.  In fact, one does have to ask why get a license? As I began to 
ponder that question I began to realize that it is less for the excitement and 
mystique of reaching out to others far away and more about simple 
accomplishment.  Earning a license requires that I gain the necessary knowledge.  
After all, if it was only about communicating with others, I could do that with 
the 
internet or family radios (FRS) or, if I *had* to have a license, a General 
Mobile Radio Service license.  No knowledge required.  But it's about learning 
the basics of electronics, of radio waves, and the rules that govern their use.  

I like to learn.

One of the things I've been thinking about lately is the range of knowledge that 
we all carry around that we don't really recognize or appreciate.  As it turns 
out, as I started to study for the exam I began to realize how much knowledge I 
already had in this domain.  I already understand the basics of electronic 
circuits, for example, In fact, I took a couple of practice tests and the only 
real areas I failed were those related to the rules. 

I'm excited to get started on this bucket list item.  I may never actually do 
much with the license, but going through that process is important for me to 
meet a bucket list goal and to have the option to use amateur radio when, and 
if, I choose to.  

And options are always good.
