---
title: 'Life Long Learning'
date: 2017-11-02
categories:
    - 'General Education'
tagss:
    - education
---
# Life Long Learning

One of the 'goals' of the nursing department is that we develop 'life long 
learners'.  What this means, I suppose is up for some debate but I think, 
generally, that what is meant is that we prepare our students to learn how to 
identify their professional learning needs and help them develop the skills 
needed to meet those on-going needs.  After all, health care is an ever-evolving 
field and constant learning is required. As I have pointed out to my students 
for many years, many of the diseases that we deal with today were not identified 
<!-- more -->

when I was in school. Nor were many of the procedures that are routinely 
conducted today.  So, if the professional is to remain a professional he or she 
is required to constantly learn new information about those diseases, 
procedures, and so forth.

To aim to prepare our students to continue to learn is, clearly, an important 
goal.  But, as I think about it, I'm not sure that it's the right goal.  I was 
watching a TED talk by [Dr. Bernie Dunlap](https://www.ted.com/talks/ben_dunlap_talks_about_a_passionate_life)
the president of Wofford College in South Carolina, a few days ago and after a 20 minute talk on the influence of 
various Hungarians on his life, he got to the real point of his talk.  He was 
chronicling the interaction over dinner at his home between Dr. Francis 
Robicsek, a cardiovascular surgeon and collector of french art and Mayan art and 
Roger Milliken, CEO of Milliken & Company about, of all things, a Harry Potter 
movie.  The crux of the story was that the two were arguing over whether the 
second Harry Potter movie was as good as the first.  That these two titans 
should be discussing, much less arguing, over such a mundane thing seems 
unfathomable.  In his winning stroke, Dr. Robiscek said, "I bet you went to the 
movie with a child" to which Milliken replied that he did.  Robiscek closes in 
for the kill: "Ah-hah!  I went all by myself!"  In that moment, says Dunlap he 
realized the essence of life-long learning.  It was, he says, that "insatiable 
curiosity, that irrepressible desire to know, no matter what the subject, no 
matter what the cost" that represents life long learning.  It isn't simply 
learning that which one needs to know to remain current in one's field but the 
desire to know more about more things.  To understand in greater depth the 
totality of human knowing and experience that defines life-long learning. And 
this, I fear, we do not do well.

[Sir Ken Robinson](http://sirkenrobinson.com/) speaks and writes often of the 
negative impact that our 
educational system has on creativity.  I see his point, even if I don't fully 
agree with it.  But I think, just as importantly -- and perhaps more importantly 
-- our educational system negatively impacts our desire to learn.  By insisting 
on specific performance standards, grading work against some (nominally) 
objective standard, and a host of other oppressive measures, education has 
worked against itself by inadvertently discouraging curiosity and exploration in 
favor of 
conformity and blind acceptance.  Students are provided little incentive and 
virtually no support in thinking outside the box or of exploring things that are 
of interest to them but, at least in the minds of others, of little direct 
value.  But value is in the eye of the beholder.  Many see a liberal arts 
education as having little value because such an education does not lead 
directly to a job.  But, the liberal arts graduate has a broader, and deeper, 
overall skill set than the 'vocationally' trained student.  That broad education 
equips them with the skills to adapt to a constantly changing environment in 
ways that the B-school trained student may not.

Learning requires challenging one's self.  It requires stretching beyond what is 
known and comfortable. It requires exploring ideas, even the bad ones, to find 
out what makes them bad and to ferret out any good that might lie hidden within 
them. Learning requires taking risks to define our limits and to know what lies 
beyond what we believe we know.  It requires considering things that are not 
within our ken or belief system to understand how others believe as they do and 
how the two can be reconciled.  Learning requires freedom not restrictions.  
Yet, my wife was telling me last night that a local elementary school limits 
students to reading books only with their tested Lexile range.  How ridiculous!  
Yes, they will find the reading perhaps easier, but how do they extend their 
reading range, expand their vocabularies, and extend their understanding of the 
world if they're not allowed to stretch themselves?
